README.md, before:

# xleak

> Expose Excel files in your terminal - no Microsoft Excel required!

Inspired by [doxx](https://github.com/bgreenwell/doxx), `xleak` brings Excel spreadsheets to your command line with beautiful rendering, powerful export capabilities, and a feature-rich interactive TUI.

## Features

### Core Functionality
- **Beautiful terminal rendering** with formatted tables
- **Interactive TUI mode** - full keyboard navigation with ratatui
- **Smart data type handling** - numbers right-aligned, text left-aligned, booleans centered
- **Multi-sheet support** - seamlessly navigate between sheets (Tab/Shift+Tab)
- **Multiple export formats** - CSV, JSON, plain text
- **Blazing fast** - powered by `calamine`, the fastest Excel parser in Rust
- **Multiple file formats** - supports `.xlsx`, `.xls`, `.xlsm`, `.xlsb`, `.ods`

### Interactive TUI Features
- **Full-text search** - search across all cells with `/`, navigate with `n`/`N`
- **Clipboard support** - copy cells (`c`) or entire rows (`C`) to clipboard
- **Formula display** - view Excel formulas in cell detail view (Enter key)
- **Jump to row/column** - press `Ctrl+G` to jump to any cell (e.g., `A100`, `500`, `10,5`)
- **Large file optimization** - lazy loading for files with 1000+ rows
- **Progress indicators** - real-time feedback for long operations
- **Visual cell highlighting** - current row, column, and cell clearly marked

## Installation

```bash
# Install from source
git clone <your-repo-url>
cd xleak
cargo install --path .
```

## Usage

### Interactive TUI Mode (Recommended)
```bash
# Launch interactive viewer
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx -i

# Start on a specific sheet
xleak report.xlsx --sheet "Q3 Results" -i

# View formulas by default
xleak data.xlsx -i --formulas
```

**TUI Keyboard Shortcuts:**
- `↑ ↓ ← →` - Navigate cells
- `Enter` - View cell details (including formulas)
- `/` - Search across all cells
- `n` / `N` - Jump to next/previous search result
- `Ctrl+G` - Jump to specific row/cell (e.g., `100`, `A50`, `10,5`)
- `c` - Copy current cell to clipboard
- `C` - Copy entire row to clipboard
- `Tab` / `Shift+Tab` - Switch between sheets
- `?` - Show help
- `q` - Quit

### Non-Interactive Mode

#### View a spreadsheet
```bash
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx
```

#### View a specific sheet
```bash
# By name
xleak report.xlsx --sheet "Q3 Results"

# By index (1-based)
xleak report.xlsx --sheet 2
```

#### Limit displayed rows
```bash
# Show only first 20 rows
xleak large-file.xlsx -n 20

# Show all rows
xleak file.xlsx -n 0
```

#### Export data
```bash
# Export to CSV
xleak data.xlsx --export csv > output.csv

# Export to JSON
xleak data.xlsx --export json > output.json

# Export as plain text (tab-separated)
xleak data.xlsx --export text > output.txt
```

#### Combine options
```bash
# Export specific sheet as CSV
xleak workbook.xlsx --sheet "Sales" --export csv > sales.csv
```

## Examples

```bash
# Launch interactive viewer
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx -i

# Quick preview in non-interactive mode
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx

# See specific sheet with limited rows
xleak financial-data.xlsx --sheet "Summary" -n 10

# Interactive mode with formulas visible
xleak data.xlsx -i --formulas

# Export all data from a sheet
xleak survey-results.xlsx --sheet "Responses" --export csv -n 0
```

## Performance

xleak is optimized for both small and large files:
- **Small files** (< 1000 rows): Instant loading with full eager loading
- **Large files** (≥ 1000 rows): Automatic lazy loading with row caching
  - Memory usage: ~400KB for 10,000 row files
  - Loads only visible rows on demand
  - Progress indicators for long operations

## Comparison to Alternatives

| Tool | Format | Speed | Terminal Native | Interactive | Search | Formulas |
|------|--------|-------|----------------|-------------|--------|----------|
| **xleak** | ✅ xlsx/xls/ods | ⚡ Fast | ✅ Yes | ✅ Full TUI | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| Excel | ✅ xlsx | ❌ Slow startup | ❌ GUI only | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| pandas | ✅ Many | ❌ Slow | ❌ Python required | ❌ No | ❌ No | ❌ No |
| csvlook | ❌ CSV only | ✅ Fast | ✅ Yes | ❌ No | ❌ No | ❌ No |

## Built With

- **Rust** - for performance and reliability
- **calamine** - the fastest Excel/ODS parser
- **ratatui** - terminal user interface framework
- **prettytable-rs** - beautiful terminal tables
- **clap** - elegant CLI argument parsing
- **arboard** - cross-platform clipboard support

## License

MIT

## Credits

- Inspired by [doxx](https://github.com/bgreenwell/doxx) by bgreenwell
- Powered by [calamine](https://github.com/tafia/calamine)

Commit message:

docs: add reference to doxx for .docx viewing

README.md, after:

# xleak

> Expose Excel files in your terminal - no Microsoft Excel required!

Inspired by [doxx](https://github.com/bgreenwell/doxx), `xleak` brings Excel spreadsheets to your command line with beautiful rendering, powerful export capabilities, and a feature-rich interactive TUI.

## Features

### Core Functionality
- **Beautiful terminal rendering** with formatted tables
- **Interactive TUI mode** - full keyboard navigation with ratatui
- **Smart data type handling** - numbers right-aligned, text left-aligned, booleans centered
- **Multi-sheet support** - seamlessly navigate between sheets (Tab/Shift+Tab)
- **Multiple export formats** - CSV, JSON, plain text
- **Blazing fast** - powered by `calamine`, the fastest Excel parser in Rust
- **Multiple file formats** - supports `.xlsx`, `.xls`, `.xlsm`, `.xlsb`, `.ods`

### Interactive TUI Features
- **Full-text search** - search across all cells with `/`, navigate with `n`/`N`
- **Clipboard support** - copy cells (`c`) or entire rows (`C`) to clipboard
- **Formula display** - view Excel formulas in cell detail view (Enter key)
- **Jump to row/column** - press `Ctrl+G` to jump to any cell (e.g., `A100`, `500`, `10,5`)
- **Large file optimization** - lazy loading for files with 1000+ rows
- **Progress indicators** - real-time feedback for long operations
- **Visual cell highlighting** - current row, column, and cell clearly marked

## Installation

```bash
# Install from source
git clone <your-repo-url>
cd xleak
cargo install --path .
```

## Usage

### Interactive TUI Mode (Recommended)
```bash
# Launch interactive viewer
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx -i

# Start on a specific sheet
xleak report.xlsx --sheet "Q3 Results" -i

# View formulas by default
xleak data.xlsx -i --formulas
```

**TUI Keyboard Shortcuts:**
- `↑ ↓ ← →` - Navigate cells
- `Enter` - View cell details (including formulas)
- `/` - Search across all cells
- `n` / `N` - Jump to next/previous search result
- `Ctrl+G` - Jump to specific row/cell (e.g., `100`, `A50`, `10,5`)
- `c` - Copy current cell to clipboard
- `C` - Copy entire row to clipboard
- `Tab` / `Shift+Tab` - Switch between sheets
- `?` - Show help
- `q` - Quit

### Non-Interactive Mode

#### View a spreadsheet
```bash
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx
```

#### View a specific sheet
```bash
# By name
xleak report.xlsx --sheet "Q3 Results"

# By index (1-based)
xleak report.xlsx --sheet 2
```

#### Limit displayed rows
```bash
# Show only first 20 rows
xleak large-file.xlsx -n 20

# Show all rows
xleak file.xlsx -n 0
```

#### Export data
```bash
# Export to CSV
xleak data.xlsx --export csv > output.csv

# Export to JSON
xleak data.xlsx --export json > output.json

# Export as plain text (tab-separated)
xleak data.xlsx --export text > output.txt
```

#### Combine options
```bash
# Export specific sheet as CSV
xleak workbook.xlsx --sheet "Sales" --export csv > sales.csv
```

## Examples

```bash
# Launch interactive viewer
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx -i

# Quick preview in non-interactive mode
xleak quarterly-report.xlsx

# See specific sheet with limited rows
xleak financial-data.xlsx --sheet "Summary" -n 10

# Interactive mode with formulas visible
xleak data.xlsx -i --formulas

# Export all data from a sheet
xleak survey-results.xlsx --sheet "Responses" --export csv -n 0
```

## Performance

xleak is optimized for both small and large files:
- **Small files** (< 1000 rows): Instant loading with full eager loading
- **Large files** (≥ 1000 rows): Automatic lazy loading with row caching
  - Memory usage: ~400KB for 10,000 row files
  - Loads only visible rows on demand
  - Progress indicators for long operations

## Comparison to Alternatives

| Tool | Format | Speed | Terminal Native | Interactive | Search | Formulas |
|------|--------|-------|----------------|-------------|--------|----------|
| **xleak** | ✅ xlsx/xls/ods | ⚡ Fast | ✅ Yes | ✅ Full TUI | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| Excel | ✅ xlsx | ❌ Slow startup | ❌ GUI only | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| pandas | ✅ Many | ❌ Slow | ❌ Python required | ❌ No | ❌ No | ❌ No |
| csvlook | ❌ CSV only | ✅ Fast | ✅ Yes | ❌ No | ❌ No | ❌ No |

## Related Projects

Looking to view Word documents in the terminal? Check out **[doxx](https://github.com/bgreenwell/doxx)** - a terminal viewer for `.docx` files with similar TUI capabilities.

## Built With

- **Rust** - for performance and reliability
- **calamine** - the fastest Excel/ODS parser
- **ratatui** - terminal user interface framework
- **prettytable-rs** - beautiful terminal tables
- **clap** - elegant CLI argument parsing
- **arboard** - cross-platform clipboard support

## License

MIT

## Credits

- Inspired by [doxx](https://github.com/bgreenwell/doxx) by bgreenwell
- Powered by [calamine](https://github.com/tafia/calamine)
